Singularity: Planet-Scale, Preemptive and Elastic
Scheduling of AI Workloads
Dharma Shukla, Muthian Sivathanu, Srinidhi Viswanatha, Bhargav Gulavani, Rimma Nehme,
Amey Agrawal, Chen Chen, Nipun Kwatra, Ramachandran Ramjee, Pankaj Sharma,
Atul Katiyar, Vipul Modi, Vaibhav Sharma, Abhishek Singh, Shreshth Singhal,
Kaustubh Welankar, Lu Xun, Ravi Anupindi, Karthik Elangovan, Hasibur Rahman, Zhou Lin,
Rahul Seetharaman, Cheng Xu, Eddie Ailijiang, Suresh Krishnappa, Mark Russinovich
Microsoft
Abstract
Lowering costs by driving high utilization across deep learn-
ing workloads is a crucial lever for cloud providers. We
present Singularity, Microsoft’s globally distributed sched-
uling service for highly-efficient and reliable execution of
deep learning training and inference workloads. At the heart
of Singularity is a novel, workload-aware scheduler that can
transparently preempt and elastically scale deep learning
workloads to drive high utilization without impacting their
correctness or performance across a global fleet of AI accel-
erators (e.g., GPUs, FPGAs).
All jobs in Singularity are preemptible, migratable, and
dynamically resizable (elastic) by default: a live job can be
dynamically and transparently (a) preempted and migrated
to a different set of nodes, cluster, data center or a region
and resumed exactly from the point where the execution was
preempted, and (b) resized (i.e., elastically scaled up/down)
on a varying set of accelerators of a given type. Our mecha-
nisms are transparent in that they do not require the user to
make any changes to their code or require using any custom
libraries that may limit flexibility. Additionally, our approach
significantly improves the reliability of deep learning work-
loads. We show that the resulting efficiency and reliability
gains with Singularity are achieved with negligible impact on
the steady-state performance. Finally, our design approach
is agnostic of DNN architectures and handles a variety of
parallelism strategies (e.g., data/pipeline/model parallelism).
1
Introduction
Singularity is a fully managed, globally distributed infras-
tructure service for AI workloads at Microsoft, with support
for diverse hardware accelerators. Singularity is designed
from the ground up to scale across a global fleet of hundreds
of thousands of GPUs and other AI accelerators. Singular-
ity is built with one key goal: driving down the cost of AI
by maximizing the aggregate useful throughput on a given
fixed pool of capacity of accelerators at planet scale, while
providing stringent SLAs for multiple pricing tiers. Figure 1
shows the high-level architecture of Singularity, including
its hierarchical scheduling system consisting of scheduling
micro-services at the global, regional and workload scopes.
1.1
Design Goals
In order to maximize the fleet-wide throughput, Singularity
adopts the following design principles:
a. No idling of resources: Singularity treats the entire fleet
of accelerators as a single logical, shared cluster, and avoids
any resource fragmentation or static reservation of capacity.
The Singularity scheduler opportunistically uses spare capac-
ity anywhere across the globe transcending cluster, region,
and workload boundaries (training vs. inference).
b. Provide job-level SLAs: While opportunistically using
spare capacity, Singularity simultaneously provides isolation
by respecting job-level SLAs. For example, Singularity adapts
to increasing load on an inference job, freeing up capacity
by elastically scaling down or preempting training jobs.
c. Resilience to failures: DNN training jobs run for hours,
days or even weeks, so restarting from scratch upon failure
has a prohibitive cost. In Singularity, jobs resume from where
they got preempted, thus minimizing wasted work.
1.2
Key Mechanisms
To achieve the above three goals, Singularity relies on two
key core scheduling primitives:
1. Preemption and Migration: Singularity can transpar-
ently checkpoint, preempt and migrate all DNN jobs across
nodes or even across clusters and regions. The checkpoint-
ing is done by using an efficient synchronization barrier to
achieve a consistent cut of the distributed state across all the
workers of a distributed job.
2. Resizing/Elasticity: Singularity enables all jobs to be dy-
namically and elastically scaled up or down in a transparent
manner to use a variable number of AI accelerators.
The above mechanisms are transparent in that Singularity
requires no changes to the user scripts, or has no dependen-
cies on frameworks/libraries etc. (much like how an operat-
ing system preempts and time-slices unmodified processes).
This is crucial for providing consistent SLAs to arbitrary deep
learning workloads without relying on any cooperation from
users to maintain the SLAs. As a result, checkpointing, migra-
tion, and elasticity are enabled by default for all jobs, instead
of being the niche features they are today.
arXiv:2202.07848v2  [cs.DC]  21 Feb 2022
Singularity
Global scheduler
Regional scheduler
Workload scheduler
Core Scheduling Primitives
Distributed Barrier
Checkpoint
Restore
Failover
Suspend
Resume
Migrate
Scale Up/Down
Hardware Abstraction Layer (HAL)
NVIDIA NVML
NVIDIA NCCL
NVIDIA CUDA
AMD SML
AMD RCCL
AMD ROCM
Backend Networks
Storage
Containerized Compute
GPU
FPGA
CPU
ASIC
Deep learning (training and inference) workloads
…
Model 1
train.py
Model 2
train.py
Model 3
train.py
Model 4
train.py
Model 5
train.py
Model 6
train.py
Model n
train.py
ASIC Software Libraries
ASIC Communication Library
ASIC Management Library
Figure 1. Singularity System Architecture
The above mechanisms are also work-conserving, in that a
migrated or resized job resumes at exactly the same point in
program execution with exactly the same state (e.g., program
counter, stack, etc.) as when it was preempted or resized.
While Singularity is a significantly broad and complex
distributed system, in this paper, we only focus on the above
core mechanisms of the Singularity scheduler that make all
jobs transparently preemptible, migratable, and elastic.
At the core of transparent preemption, migration and elas-
ticity in Singularity, is a novel approach of automatically de-
coupling the job from its accelerator resources. The binding
between the job workers in Singularity and the accelerator
devices is dynamic and constantly changing during the life-
time of the job. To scale up or scale down a job, we simply
change the number of devices the workers are mapped to.
This is completely transparent to the user, as the world-size
(i.e.total number of workers) of the job remains the same
regardless of the number of physical devices running the job.
Singularity uses a novel technique called replica splicing that
makes it possible to time-slice multiple workers on the same
device with negligible overhead, while enabling each worker
to use the entire device memory. Replica splicing relies on
domain knowledge to exploit memory content similarity be-
tween workers of a distributed training job at specific points
in the program execution.
To achieve such decoupling, Singularity introduces the
notion of a device proxy. The device-proxy runs in its own
address space and has a one-to-one correspondence to a phys-
ical accelerator device. When a job worker initiates device
APIs, they are intercepted and sent over the shared memory
to the device-proxy process, whose lifetime is decoupled
from the lifetime of the worker process. This separation
achieves two key benefits: (a) the host address space is kept
clean of device-specific mappings and other side-effects cre-
ated by GPU libraries such as CUDA, thus making it easier
to checkpoint and migrate the host process with an exist-
ing tool called CRIU [1] (b) it allows dynamic, transparent
time-slicing of multiple workers on the same device, with the
device-proxy performing the multiplexing and scheduling
across the workers.
1.3
Contributions
In this paper, we make the following key contributions:
1. We propose a transparent and robust mechanism to
checkpoint generic DNN jobs that are written without
checkpointing support, thus making all jobs automati-
cally checkpointable, preemptible and migratable.
2. We propose novel, semantics-aware techniques for
achieving distributed barrier across all the workers
of a DNN job in a completely transparent manner.
This is key to achieving a consistent cut of the dis-
tributed state of a DNN training job (including, pro-
gram counter, stack, CPU and GPU memory etc) span-
ning multiple machines, so that it can be resumed
precisely from the same point when its execution was
previously preempted.
3. We enable, for the first time, transparent and dynamic
resizing that makes all jobs elastic by default, using
a novel technique called replica splicing that allows
transparent time-slicing of multiple workers of a DNN
job on the same GPU with negligible overhead ( 2-3%)
with ultra-lightweight context switches in a robust
and generic manner.
4. We evaluate the efficacy and the end-to-end efficiency
of our core mechanisms, with detailed experiments
across models employing different kinds of parallelism
(data, pipeline, or tensor parallelism). We show that
the steady state performance overhead of dynamic in-
terception of GPU calls, the transparent distributed
barrier algorithm, and the transparent time-slicing, is
negligible (all within 3%) for a wide range of work-
loads. Further, we demonstrate that this approach is
robust and practical to maintain despite rapidly chang-
ing versions of PyTorch and CUDA. We also show that
migration and resizing latency in Singularity is reason-
able (tens of seconds) with no repeat of computation,
and that checkpoint sizes are comparable to user-level
checkpointing.
The rest of the paper is structured as follows: In § 2 we
provide an overview of the core scheduling mechanisms. We
present our basic approach of domain-specific interception
in § 3, before describing the design of transparent migration
(§ 4) and transparent elasticity (§ 5). We discuss the imple-
mentation in § 6, and evaluate our system in § 7. We discuss
related work in § 8, and conclude in § 9.
2
2
Overview of Key Mechanisms
In order to improve utilization and reliability, Singularity
introduces novel mechanisms to make all jobs preemptible
and resizable by default. Singularity takes a consistent check-
point of a job distributed across several nodes and employing
various kinds of parallelism such as data, pipeline, or ten-
sor parallelism, and can resume the job at a later point on
a potentially different number of devices using transparent
time-slicing, in a potentially different region. In this section,
we first describe three key aspects of these mechanisms: (a)
transparency (no change or constraints on the user code),
(b) work-conserving (job resumes from the same program
execution point where it was previously preempted at), and
(c) decoupled execution. We then describe how the scheduler
exploits these mechanisms.
2.1
Transparent to Users
Existing approaches for checkpointing and elasticity rely
on the user to either directly write code to implement these
mechanisms, or to use specific libraries [11, 26] that han-
dle checkpointing and elasticity. Both these approaches are
sub-optimal. The former burdens the user with the com-
plexity of saving/restoring python program state (e.g., loop
variables, control flow, learning rate scheduler, dataloader
state, instruction pointer, etc.), ensuring that the program
resumes at the correct point (much like writing re-entrant
code, which is error-prone and hard to debug), changing
hyper-parameters when the job scales up or down, and so
on. In the latter approach, the user loses flexibility, as these
libraries take control of the training loop to keep checkpoint-
ing tractable. This restricts the customizability to the user;
such libraries have poor adoption as a result. Most DNN
training workloads today as such are not checkpointable or
resizable.
Singularity represents a paradigm shift from the status
quo, in that our core mechanisms of checkpointing, migra-
tion, and elasticity do not require any cooperation from the
user, and are automatic, by default. This is important for two
reasons: (1) it enables the scheduler to rely on these mecha-
nisms as first-class constructs for all jobs in order to provide
stringent SLAs and, (2) it completely hides the complexity of
checkpointing and elasticity from the user who can focus on
writing code with full flexibility, and not even be aware of
these mechanisms. For example, the user writes code for a
constant world-size (i.e., number of workers), and is oblivious
to how many physical devices Singularity places the job on.
2.2
Work-conserving
The checkpoint that Singularity takes is comprised of con-
sistent address-space snapshots of individual workers of the
job. As these snapshots capture the full program state such
as instruction pointer, stack, heap etc., the job resumes ex-
actly from the point where it was preempted, with no lost
work. In contrast, today’s mechanisms for checkpointing
and elasticity force the program to restart from a previous
model checkpoint, thus redoing the initialization work and
the work performed since the last checkpoint (usually at an
epoch-granularity to keep the checkpointing logic tractable).
2.3
Decoupled Execution
The goals of improving the reliability of the jobs and the effi-
ciency/utilization of the fleet, are extremely synergistic. The
Singularity scheduler addresses these goals by decoupling
the mapping between the jobs from the underlying resources.
The Singularity scheduler transparently virtualizes the world
size and the rank assignment. This decoupling is crucial for
transparently checkpointing and preempting jobs and sub-
sequently resuming them on different nodes, clusters, data
centers from the previous checkpointed state, with either the
same or different number of GPUs. During the steady state
execution of a job, the Singularity scheduler also transpar-
ently decouples the training logic of the job worker process
(e.g., written in PyTorch) from its interaction with the GPU
(Section 3).
2.4
Benefits to Users
Transparent and work-conserving checkpointing, migration,
and elasticity empower the scheduler in fundamental ways:
Improved fault tolerance. Any job (irrespective of whether
the user has written the checkpointing logic) can be re-
sumed precisely from the most recent checkpoint taken au-
tomatically by the system in the event of hardware failures
(GPU/node/network), instead of restarting from scratch. This
significantly improves the useful fleet-wide throughput.
Opportunistic usage of capacity. Transparent preemp-
tion and migration enables a job to use spare resources any-
where regardless of cluster/region boundaries. Further, it
enables jobs with lower SLA to opportunistically use spare
capacity, and be quickly preempted (without lost work) when
jobs with higher SLA arrive. Transparent elasticity enables
jobs to expand to use spare capacity and shrink when capac-
ity becomes scarce.
Background defragmentation for locality. Locality or
topological domains for fault-tolerance (e.g., racks), device-
to-device interconnectivity, data locality etc. get fragmented
as jobs enter and leave the system, making it hard to schedule
a large job with locality constraints. Migration of small jobs
enables the scheduler to defragment locality domains to
place larger jobs.
Online upgrades. Fleet-wide live upgrades can be done
without killing jobs, as jobs running on those machines can
be cheaply and transparently migrated to a different cluster.
2.5
Throughput SLAs for training efficiency
Transparent job preemption, migration, and elasticity enable
Singularity to define novel SLA for training efficiency. While
traditional SLAs such as latency or five-nines of availability
3
Metric
Premium
Standard
Basic
GPU time fraction
95%*
70%*
Best effort
guarantee
(like spot VMs)
Preemption
Almost never
Infrequent
Frequent
Scale-up priority
High
Medium
Low
(spare capacity)
Scale-down priority
Low
Medium
High
(capacity crunch)
Table 1. SLA for Training Jobs. Time-fraction values are
illustrative; exact values are still evolving.
apply to inference workloads, they are a poor fit for DNN
training. Singularity introduces the GPU fraction metric that
quantifies throughput in the face of preemption and elasticity.
Table 1 describes the multiple tiers of SLAs that Singularity
provides. A job arriving with a demand for 𝑁GPU (based
on soft quota) may get more than 𝑁or fewer than 𝑁GPUs,
depending on the competing cluster load. The user is charged
only for the actual usage and not for the quota; unused quota
can be transparently used by other users/jobs.
If 𝑇𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙is the wall clock completion time (for all itera-
tions/epochs) of a job when it ran on 𝑁dedicated GPUs with
no preemption, and 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙is the actual completion time in
Singularity, 𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙>= 𝑇𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙with resource over-subscription,
because the job may be preempted or scaled-down by Sin-
gularity during execution. The GPU time fraction of a job is
calculated as 𝑇𝑖𝑑𝑒𝑎𝑙/𝑇𝑟𝑒𝑎𝑙. It’s a relative slowdown, i.e., if the
job would take 𝐻hours in a dedicated capacity setup, for
Premium SLA job it would take at most 𝐻/0.95 hours, and
for Standard SLA tier at most 𝐻/0.7 hours. The GPU fraction
SLA is enforced at an hourly granularity. The scheduling
policy in Singularity is aimed at maximizing the fleet-wide
throughput while minimizing violations of these SLAs.
3
Domain-specific Interception
To provide transparent checkpointing and elasticity, Singu-
larity exploits the narrow interface that exists between the
execution on the CPU and the execution on accelerators,
such as GPUs. Any interaction with an accelerator has to
go through specific libraries (e.g., CUDA for NVIDIA GPUs,
ROCm for AMD GPUs, etc..,), which Singularity dynami-
cally intercepts via the LD_PRELOAD mechanism. Most of
this functionality resides in a component called the device-
proxy. The device-proxy can be viewed as a hardware ab-
straction service for the accelerator device, and has a server
component (one per device), and a client component that is
embedded in each process interacting with the device. All
accelerator-specifc APIs invoked by the host are intercepted
and shipped to the device-proxy server, which runs in an
isolated address space1. Running device APIs in a separate
address space helps in two ways: (a) it keeps the host address
space clean of device mappings and other such dependencies
1The same principle of remote execution of GPU calls is also used in services
such as NVIDIA MPS [7], which intercepts on a closed (internal) API.
Device API (CUDA, ROCm)
Framework
(Pytorch/TensorFlow)
Helper Libraries
(e.g. DeepSpeed)
User Code
(Training Loop)
Device API (CUDA, ROCm)
Memory
Management
Log/Replay
Timeslicing
Accelerator 
Device
(e.g. GPUs,
FPGA, ASIC)
CPU
Address Space
Device Proxy
Address Space
   Shared Memory Channel
Dynamic Interception
(Device Proxy Client)
Device RAM
Figure 2. Overview of Device-Proxy. Device-proxy runs
in a different address space compared to the client process.
CPU address space retains device pointers whose validity
needs to be preserved across migration.
that break checkpointing utilities such as CRIU (b) it allows
the device-proxy to be efficiently shared across multiple
worker processes during time-slicing for elasticity.
The communication between the host process and the
device-proxy is in the critical path of dispatch to device, so
we make it low-latency by using lock-free shared memory
channels so that there is no context switch overhead per call.
Figure 2 shows the high-level architecture of device-proxy.
There are two types of interceptors in the device-proxy:
Dispatch Interceptors (𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡) and Semantics-Aware Intercep-
tors (𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡). A 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡is semantics-oblivious, and only deals
with shipping the API cross-address-space to the device-
proxy server, handling serialization/deserialization of pa-
rameters/response. A 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡, on the other hand, incorporates
custom logic at the client-side or server-side (referred to as
client 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡orserver 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡respectively), to implement func-
tionality such as barrier, time-slicing, memory management,
etc. Note that 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡and 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡are not mutually exclusive; for
example, the same API may simultaneously have a client
𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡, a 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡for cross-address-space, and a server 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡.
3.1
Limiting surface area of 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡
To be pragmatic and maintainable in a production system, the
interception layer must be complete (all device calls invoked
by the job must be intercepted and sent to device-proxy
server), and scalable (low engineering cost). Given the rapid
pace of new libraries (such as Apex [6], Thrust [8], Deep-
speed [26], OpenAI Triton [9] that directly issue kernels, a
naive approach of intercepting all such APIs that interact
with the device is impractical.
Singularity limits the surface area of 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡’s by intercepting
at the low-level, i.e.. the driver API for launching a kernel
(e.g., cudaLaunchKernel for NVIDIA GPUs). This ensures
4
good coverage while being scalable, as other libraries that
define custom kernels eventually go through the launch API.
Singularity has an automated code generator that generates
the stubs for all 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡’s; it simply needs a list of header files
from the specific accelerator library (e.g., CUDA), with some
annotations to indicate the state-changing calls.
3.2
Hardware Abstraction Layer for 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡
While 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡’s are auto-generated, most of the custom func-
tionality of the Singularity device-proxy (e.g., distributed
barrier, context switch for time-slicing) resides in 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡’s.
Most of the logic in a 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡is device-agnostic, and uses a
hardware abstraction layer that maps to device-specific API
(e.g., nccl_allreduce). The hardware abstraction layer for an
accelerator encapsulates key functionality that is common
across accelerators. While the current implementation is
specific to NVIDIA GPUs, to handle a new device type, one
simply needs to implement the hardware-abstraction-layer
for that device, mapping the specific APIs of the device with
the equivalent APIs in the HAL.
There are three types of device-agnostic functionality that
require 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡: memory allocation, communication, and de-
vice synchronization.
3.2.1
Memory allocation. Memory allocation APIs (e.g.,
cudaMalloc, cudaFree) need a 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡, because the device-
proxy takes over memory allocation. This enables the device-
proxy to have full visibility into what regions of the GPU
memory are actually in use, which helps reduce checkpoint
size. It also allows the device-proxy to use custom mem-
ory allocation mechanisms to aid transparent time-slicing of
multiple workers on the same GPU for elasticity.
3.2.2
Communication. Most accelerators have a collec-
tive communication library (e.g., NCCL for NVIDIA GPUs,
RCCL for AMD GPUs). A 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡on these APIs enables Sin-
gularity to implement algorithms for the distributed barrier
to synchronize across multiple workers of a distributed job
to get a consistent checkpoint (e.g., when no collective calls
are in flight at any rank). Singularity provides a generic
barrier implementation by piggybacking on the same com-
munication APIs. 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡on these APIs also helps in managing
collective calls during time-slicing for elasticity.
3.2.3
Device Synchronization. Device synchronization
APIs require a 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡to handle transparent elasticity. The
time-slicing in Singularity is semantics-aware, as communi-
cation across time-sliced ranks has to be correctly handled.
Correct handling of the synchronization APIs (e.g., cudaS-
treamWaitEvent in CUDA) is essential for correctness and
liveness during time-slicing.
3.3
𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡for Host-specific functionality
In addition to the hardware abstraction layer for the device,
Singularity also uses a 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡for selective CPU libraries; in
particular, the libc I/O libraries (e.g., open, read, write, etc.)
are intercepted to track/log updates made by the job to the
local file system, so that mutated files can be migrated along
with the process checkpoint. Unlike a 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡for a device
library API, a host 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡does not have a corresponding 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡,
and runs in the host address space.
While domain-specific interception is device-agnostic, for
simplicity, the sections below focus on NVIDIA GPUs.
4
Transparent Migration
In Singularity, preemption, resumption and resizing of a run-
ning DNN job involves consistent checkpointing and restora-
tion of four broad types of state: (a) program state in CPU
(e.g., stack, heap, instruction pointer, etc.), (b) model training
state in GPU (e.g., model parameters, optimizer state, etc)
(c) control state dealing with interaction between the CPU
and GPU (active streams, synchronization events), and (d)
inter-GPU and inter-node communication state for different
types of parallelism (data/pipeline/tensor-parallel, etc.).
For scheduled migrations, as well as recovery from un-
planned failures, Singularity’s transparent checkpointing
logic is executed in two modes: (1) On-demand based on
an extenal command when the scheduler decides that the
job needs to be preempted, and (2) Periodically based on the
interval specified by the user (epoch-level or time-based).
Achieving transparent checkpointing of generic DNN jobs
is challenging for several reasons. First, at the time of check-
pointing a given job, Singularity must ensure a consistent cut
of the distributed state spanning multiple hosts and GPUs
across multiple machines; all workers of a distributed job
must be at a safe and consistent state with respect to col-
lective communication (e.g., allreduce). Second, the in-flight
state between CPU and GPU (e.g., active handles, device ad-
dresses stored in host memory) must be restored consistently,
despite the state management being done by proprietary
closed-source libraries such as CUDA. Third, the space over-
head of checkpointing must be kept low for large, distributed
jobs with hundreds of workers.
4.1
Checkpointing Program State (CPU)
There are multiple systems that provide address-space migra-
tion [1, 13], of which CRIU is the most widely used. However,
a key limitation with CRIU is that it does not handle device
mappings by processes using GPU. To use CRIU, the host
address space must be isolated from device-specific libraries.
Fortunately, the device-proxy architecture (§ 3) provides us
that isolation. The device-proxy server is mostly stateless
(with some exceptions addressed below) and hence is not
checkpointed; it is simply restarted at the destination.
4.2
Checkpointing device state
Model state (e.g., parameters) is checkpointed by the device-
proxy process via device-to-host memcpy. Because of the
5
memory allocation 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡in Singularity, the device-proxy
knows which regions of the GPU memory are actually in
use, thus significantly reducing checkpoint size.
One challenge is that when restoring at the destination,
the device memory could get mapped to a different address in
the new device-proxy server address space, thus invalidating
the pointers in the host process. To avoid this, the device-
proxy hogs the entire GPU memory at startup (with some
slack for state tracked by the device libraries), and has a
server 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡for mmap performed by the device allocator
(e.g., cudaMalloc) to always map to the same CPU address.
4.2.1
Consistency of device handles in CPU. Similar
to memory pointers, the host address space also retains other
handles to the device state. For example, a cudaStreamCreate
returns an opaque handle that can be used by the host as a
reference in subsequent GPU calls. However, as the device-
proxy server is started afresh after migration, the handle
would not be valid. In order to preserve fidelity of these
handles across migration, we virtualize these handles. The
device-proxy does not return the actual handle returned by
the device, but instead, a virtual handle, and remembers this
mapping as part of the client state. After restore and replay,
the physical handles may change, but the virtual handle re-
mains stable. All stateful API calls (e.g., creation of context,
stream, event, etc.) are annotated, and the 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡for those calls
automatically log them for replay upon restore. We keep the
log compact by applying a few domain-specific rules.
4.3
Communication state
Most communication between workers of a DNN job hap-
pen through collective-communication libraries (e.g., NCCL)
that handle both GPU-Direct (e.g., NVLink) and cross-node
communication. As these libraries are proprietary, we can-
not handle in-flight communication. Hence, at the time of
checkpointing, we quiesce the job to ensure that there are
no collective calls in flight.
Quiescing cannot be done independently by each worker,
because of the semantics of collective communications. For
a collective call (e.g., allreduce) to complete, all participating
workers must complete that call. If a worker checkpoints
after say the 𝑛𝑡ℎallreduce call has returned (thus freezing
that worker), another worker may have already issued the
(𝑛+1)𝑡ℎcall, which would never complete and thus deadlock.
Thus, before checkpointing, all workers must have issued
the same set of collective calls. Singularity uses a novel dis-
tributed barrier algorithm that achieves this property in a
completely transparent manner.
4.3.1
Distributed barrier. One production constraint in
designing the distributed barrier algorithm was to avoid
introducing new failure paths, for example, coordinating
through an out-of-band channel (TCP, remote storage, etc.).
The barrier algorithm in Singularity piggybacks on the same
communication library that the job uses for collective com-
munication, by introducing additional meta-allreduces to ex-
change barrier protocol state. The algorithm needs to ensure
that the ordering of the additional meta allreduces relative
to the regular allreduces performed by the job is the same
across all workers (program order requirement for collective
communication to avoid deadlocks);
Our barrier algorithm issues an asynchronous tandem
meta-allreduce before every data allreduce issued by the
job. This trivially ensures consistent program order. The al-
gorithm operates in two phases: Phase 1 is the steady state
and Phase 2 is when a barrier request has been received. The
tandem meta-allreduce is a SUM allreduce on a payload that
is comprised of two integers:
• need_barrier: a worker sends a ‘1’ if it has received
a barrier command, ‘0’ otherwise. If 𝑆𝑈𝑀(𝑛𝑒𝑒𝑑) > 0,
the worker knows someone has initiated the barrier
protocol, and switches to Phase 2.
• ack_barrier: a worker sends a ‘1’ if it has switched
to Phase 2, i.e., it acknowledges that it has seen a
barrier request directly or indirectly, ‘0’ otherwise. If
𝑆𝑈𝑀(𝑎𝑐𝑘) == 𝑤𝑜𝑟𝑙𝑑_𝑠𝑖𝑧𝑒(i.e., the total number of
ranks), the worker knows that everyone has acknowl-
edged, and can safely acquire the barrier.
Once a worker enters Phase 2, it enters a synchronous mode:
every collective call performed by that worker is synchro-
nous; this ensures timely termination of the barrier protocol.
The barrier algorithm is guaranteed to complete within at
most two mini-batches and guarantees that no in-flight col-
lective calls are outstanding at the time of barrier. It has very
little overhead in the steady state, because the tiny (2-byte)
meta-allreduce is asynchronous during Phase 1.
While the above algorithm works for data-parallel jobs,
there is additional complexity with tensor-parallel and pipeline-
parallel jobs that may perform multiple allreduces across
different groups of nodes, in addition to peer-to-peer calls
such as send/recv (for pipelining). While we can extend the
above algorithm to reason about the relative ordering be-
tween pipeline and data communication, our current design
optimizes for simplicity and checkpoint size, by using the
domain knowledge: we identify the end of a mini-batch, at
which point there is no in-flight communication either in
the tensor-parallel or pipeline-parallel dimension. We use
the same tandem meta-allreduce protocol as above, but only
once at the end of a mini-batch (instead of once per data allre-
duce) to achieve the barrier. The tradeoff is that the barrier
is delayed until the end of mini-batch (few seconds for large
models), but it gives us lower checkpoint sizes compared to
acquiring barrier in the middle of a mini-batch.
4.4
File system state
Workers in a DNN training job sometimes install local pack-
ages, and update other local files. These need to be preserved
6
after migration to a new node. Performing a container-wide
diff of the file system state (relative to a clean base image)
would be too expensive. The host 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡’s on libc file sys-
tem APIs help with this: whenever a local file is opened
in writable mode, we append the file name to a log, and
during checkpoint we copy over those files. The data copy
to remote storage is deduplicated across workers by using
content checksums.
4.5
Checkpoint/Restore flow
After a barrier is acquired successfully, the job is check-
pointed by performing criu checkpoint on the individual
workers. The CRIU dumps, along with the GPU state dumps
of active tensors, are then moved to a remote storage. At the
new destination, on a criu restore, the process starts from
the exact state it was checkpointed (i.e., just after the barrier
was acquired in the device-proxy client). The first operation
the device-proxy client performs is to respawn a fresh de-
vice proxy-server, and then replay the state-changing calls to
bring the GPU to the same state as it was before checkpoint.
The device-proxy server also copies back the GPU tensors to
GPU RAM at the same addresses they were before the check-
point. The device-proxy finally performs a fresh rendezvous,
so that the ranks can discover each other’s new locations
and re-establish the communication ring. In addition to on-
demand checkpointing initiated by the scheduler, each job in
Singularity takes checkpoints at a user-specified frequency
(e.g., every 30 minutes) to handle unplanned failures.
4.6
Compressing checkpoints
Singularity adopts several techniques to reduce checkpoint
size. First, Singularity performs per-buffer content checksum-
ming to de-dup across workers. Before uploading a device
buffer, a worker computes its content checksum, and uploads
the buffer only if no other worker has uploaded the same
buffer. With this, the size of GPU dumps in Singularity is
similar to that of the user-level checkpointing. CRIU dumps
of CPU address space are deduped across space and time. First,
there is high overlap of content between the main training
process and data loader processes; we intercept the write
calls made by CRIU to perform content-hash-based dedup
of pages. Second, there is a high degree of overlap between
checkpoints of the same process taken at different points
of time (as little of the address space changes); dedup in
the temporal dimension makes the subsequent incremental
checkpoints much smaller than the first CRIU checkpoint.
5
Transparent Elasticity
Singularity introduces a new ability to resize any DNN train-
ing job to use a varying number of GPUs, without requiring
any changes to user code and without affecting the seman-
tics of the job. Resizing a job in Singularity is completely
transparent: to the user, the job is always running with the
R1
R2
R3
R4
R1
R1
R2
R3
R4
R1
R2
R3
R4
(a) Today:
Program restarted 
from previous 
checkpoint; world size 
reduced by 4x
(b) Singularity: 
Program continues 
with same world-size
(# ranks)
Figure 3. Elasticity in Singularity vs. today
same world size (i.e., number of ranks/workers). The sched-
uler can map each worker one-to-one to a physical GPU (fully
scaled-up), or use a many-to-one mapping, where a physical
GPU is virtualized and time-sliced across multiple workers
(scaled-down case). In contrast, with libraries such as Deep-
speed [26] or PyTorch elastic [11], elasticity is exposed to
the user, as the job is restarted with a different world size af-
ter a resize from a previous checkpoint, resulting in wasted
work (e.g., initialization and iterations since the previous
checkpoint are redone). Figure 3 illustrates this.
Transparent elasticity builds on top of the transparent mi-
gration support in Singularity. For example, to scale down a
job from 4 GPUs to 1 GPU, we simply take a CRIU checkpoint
of 3 of the ranks, and migrate those processes to the single
GPU with time-slicing. Because of the properties of CRIU
checkpoints, workers resume from exactly the same pro-
gram state without redoing any computation, so the resize
is work-conserving.
Transparent and dynamic resizing poses several technical
challenges. First, when time-slicing multiple workers of a
training job on the same GPU, the fine-grained communica-
tion between the workers (e.g., allreduce) must proceed as if
the workers were running in different GPUs; this requires the
time-slicing to be semantics-aware as well as fine-grained
(multiple context switches per mini-batch). Second, for large
models, each worker may utilize nearly the entire RAM on
the GPU; fitting multiple workers on the same GPU requires
swapping GPU state back-and-forth to host memory, an ex-
pensive operation (e.g., 3-10x overhead). Third, to support
transparent elasticity for jobs that use a combination of data-
parallelism, pipeline-parallelism and tensor-parallelism, one
needs careful placement of workers on GPUs such that only
data-parallel replicas of the same model-parallel shard are
time-sliced on the same GPU, and to prevent deadlocks in
communication scheduling.
5.1
Semantics-aware time-slicing
To share a GPU across multiple workers, a simple approach
is to run the processes independently on the same GPU. With
this approach, each worker gets its exclusive subset of the
GPU memory to store its model state. However, this approach
is a non-starter: in large models, each worker utilizes nearly
the entire GPU RAM, so running multiple such workers
7
would simply run out of memory. Therefore, the time-slicing
in Singularity needs to be semantics-aware.
The device-proxy in Singularity makes such time-slicing
feasible. Because the device-proxy is decoupled from the host
process, we share the same device-proxy across multiple host-
processes (i.e., multiple ranks). As all interactions with the
GPU go through the device-proxy, it schedules the multiple
ranks intelligently, allowing only one rank to execute at a
given time on the GPU, and then chooses specific points
at which to context switch to another rank. Conceptually,
at the time of context switch, the device-proxy swaps out
the GPU memory used by the original rank (i.e., copying to
host memory) and then swaps in the GPU memory for the
new rank, thus enabling each worker to use nearly the entire
GPU RAM. Of course, such swap-out/swap-in would be quite
expensive; we describe how we optimize this in § 5.2.
To keep overheads low, we must context-switch only when
absolutely necessary. When a rank is performing just com-
pute on its respective data (e.g., forward and backward pass
operations such as matrix multiplications), there is no need
to context-switch. After the backward pass, the data-parallel
ranks participate in collective communication (e.g., allreduce)
to exchange gradients, which requires all ranks to partici-
pate (and contribute their respective gradients), necessitat-
ing a context-switch. Note that within a single mini-batch,
multiple asynchronous allreduce calls may be issued by the
framework (to overlap compute with communication). After
allreduces for the mini-batch have been issued, frameworks
such as PyTorch typically perform a synchronization oper-
ation (cudaStreamWaitEvent) on the GPU before copying
back the averaged gradients. At this synchronization point,
the device-proxy switches to the next rank that is sharing
the GPU and lets it run exclusively until it hits the same
point, and then context switches to the next rank, and so on.
Collective communication (e.g., allreduce) happens through
proprietary libraries such as NCCL. NCCL has the notion of a
communicator which is initialized for a particular ring of par-
ticipating ranks, and subsequent operations such as allreduce
just reference the communicator. To keep the interaction of
NCCL communicators with user-level time-slicing manage-
able, we decouple the logical data-parallel world size of the
job from the world-size that NCCL sees; in our approach,
NCCL sees only one rank per GPU. During time-slicing, the
device-proxy transparently performs local accumulation into
its scratch buffers, and only the last rank sharing the GPU
performs the actual nccl_allreduce with the result of the
locally accumulated gradients. Thus, after a resize operation,
the world size seen by NCCL is changed, (handled by the
fresh rendezvous after restore (§ 4.5).
5.2
Replica splicing for memory sharing
While the above approach for time-slicing is sufficient from
a correctness perspective, it is prohibitively slow. A V100
GPU has 32GB of RAM (A100 is even higher - up to 80GB), so
a large model could use most of the RAM for a single worker.
A single context-switch (swap-out followed by swap-in of
32GB each from host memory) per mini-batch would take
2-4 seconds, while the mini-batch computation time itself
could be much less (hundreds of ms), i.e., a 5-10x overhead.
We now present a new technique called replica splicing that
makes context-switches much cheaper.
5.2.1
Checksum-based dynamic dedup. The GPU mem-
ory consumed by a training job falls into four categories:
1. Parameters (P). The weights/parameters for each layer
of the model; forward and backward pass run on these
tensors.
2. Optimizer State (O). State tracked by the optimizer
to compute the delta to apply on parameters each it-
eration. Tracks historic state (e.g., first and second
moments of gradients)
3. Gradients (G). Each replica has its own copy of gra-
dients corresponding to its mini-batch. After the back-
ward pass, the gradients of all replicas are averaged,
which is then used to update weights consistently.
4. Activations (A). The intermediate output of the for-
ward pass for each layer; used during backward pass to
compute gradients relative to input for back-propagation.
The key insight that replica splicing exploits is that among
data-parallel replicas, the parameters (P) and optimizer state
(O) proceed in lock-step, i.e., they are updated at the end of
the mini-batch consistently by all replicas, with the (same)
averaged gradients. Thus, at the end of a mini-batch, the
tensors corresponding to P and O will be identical across
ranks sharing the GPU. Further, at the end of the mini-batch,
activation tensors (A) are freed by the framework, as the
backward pass is completed. We use these insights to make
the swap-out/swap-in conditional, in the following manner.
As the device-proxy controls the memory allocator, it has
visibility into each buffer that is allocated by the framework.
During a context-switch, the device-proxy computes content
checksums for each live buffer. During swap-out, it first looks
up whether the host already contains a buffer with the same
content checksum; if yes, it avoids the swap-out and simply
marks the GPU buffer as unused (GC happens lazily when
there is demand for fresh allocations by the new rank, so
that we can opportunistically cache multiple versions in the
device). Similarly, during swap-in of a new rank’s data, it
checks whether the device already has a buffer with that
checksum; if so, it avoids the swap-in from host. Note that
although the content matches, that buffer may be mapped to
a different device address in the new rank; in that case, the
device-proxy performs a device-to-device move of that buffer
to the desired address which is cheaper than a swap-in from
host (HBM bandwidth vs. host memory bandwidth).
With the above optimization, if 4 ranks are sharing a sin-
gle GPU, the swap-out of P and O buffers during context-
switching needs to be done only for the first rank; others
8
would find that the checksums are already present in host
memory and omit the swap. However, note that the swap-
in must still be done for each rank; when a rank starts its
time-slice, its local state contains P and O from the previous
mini-batch, while the previous rank’s copy is updated to the
current mini-batch. One can avoid the swap-in, if we have
space to store two additional versions of P and O within the
GPU (for any time-slicing factor >2)2 This brings up two
challenges: (a) the additional space for two extra copies of
P and O is unacceptable for large models (b) we would still
need to perform device-to-device copies of P and O during
context-switch, as each rank may have allocated the same
buffers at different addresses. The D2D copy cost is still non-
trivial because cyclic dependencies between (thousands of)
source and destination buffers, force the copy to happen in
phases, thus limiting parallelism. We next describe how we
address these two challenges.
5.2.2
Using domain knowledge for consistent alloca-
tions. We first address the problem of the same P and O
buffers getting different addresses in different ranks; this
happens because each worker performs its own allocations.
Singularity uses domain knowledge about deep learning
training to make the addresses consistent, without requiring
explicit coordination between replicas. We use the insight
that within data-parallel replicas, the allocation sequence
(size, ordering) for “stable” buffers such as P and O (which
are preserved across mini-batches) must be the same across
all replicas by definition because they have identical sets of
parameters. However, there could be other allocations that
are variable-sized across replicas (e.g., activations whose size
depends on input data size which may vary across mini-
batches). Because of such variable-sized allocations, the state
of the memory allocator diverges across replicas, causing
even the stable buffer allocations (that are interleaved with
other allocations) to get misaligned addresses.
To handle this, the device-proxy in Singularity uses a bi-
directional memory allocator. Stable buffers (such as P and
O) get allocated at the high end of the address space, while
other buffers get allocated at the low end. This ensures that
instability in the transient allocations (such as activations)
does not affect the memory allocator metadata in the high
region, thus ensuring that the stable buffers such as P and O
get the same addresses across replicas. We have empirically
validated this across a wide range of models and PyTorch ver-
sions. To identify stable buffers such as P and O, we seed the
allocator with a list of pre-identified stack traces (Python and
C++) pertaining to parameter and optimizer state allocations;
this list needs to be updated once per version of PyTorch,
and is quite straightforward. At the time of allocation, the
2There are at most two versions of P and O that are active - current mini-
batch and previous mini-batch, and the third copy is needed as scratch
space so that the current rank does not overwrite the previous mini-batch’s
pristine version of P and O which would be needed by the next rank.
device-proxy client gets the stack trace and matches against
this list. Note that in pathological cases, if the annotations
are incorrect and we are not able to get consistent addresses
for P and O, it can only affect performance (measurable), but
not correctness.
5.2.3
Squashing selective operations. To avoid dealing
with multiple copies of P and O (which causes either swap-in
cost or extra GPU memory), we use another domain-specific
insight. By definition, all data-parallel replicas will arrive
at the same version of P and O buffers after the completion
of a mini-batch. We also know that P and O buffers are up-
dated only after the allreduce of gradients across replicas
is completed. Thus, if we can identify the operations that
update parameters and optimizer state, we can perform those
operations only in one of the ranks sharing the device (the
“root” rank), and simply “squash” those operations in other
ranks, because (a) they would anyway result in the same
final state, and (b) the buffers have the same corresponding
addresses across ranks (§ 5.2.2) so subsequent mini-batch
computation will see the right data. To squash an operation,
the device-proxy simply omits issuing cudaLaunchKernel
to the GPU for those operations. With such squashing, we
avoid swapping in the previous version of P and O, as they
are no longer updated by other ranks.
Note that with squashing, we exploit domain-specific un-
derstanding to alter the execution sequence, so we need
to guarantee that it does not affect correctness. While rea-
sonable models conform to our assumptions in squashing,
we should prevent a pathological model from encountering
silent corruption/incorrect execution because of violation
of these assumptions. To ensure robustness, we follow an
approach of conservative validation; if validation succeeds,
squashing is guaranteed to be safe and correct, but if vali-
dation fails, we conservatively disable squashing. Thus, vi-
olation of our assumptions can only affect performance (in
which case we disable time-slicing for that model), but never
correctness.
For conservative validation, we always run the first mini-
batch (and periodically, every𝑘𝑡ℎmini-batch) with squashing
disabled (thus incurring the swap-in/out cost); this is guaran-
teed to be correct execution. In the validation mini-batch, we
enforce/assert our assumptions on the mutation behavior of
operations. At the device-proxy, identifying buffers mutated
by an operation is challenging because, for a GPU opera-
tion such as cudaLaunchKernel, the parameters could be
indirect-addressed via multiple levels of GPU buffers (opaque
to the device-proxy). Therefore, validation relies on a novel
approach of inferring the effect of an operation post-facto,
using buffer content checksums.
During the validation mini-batch, we verify that the model
conforms to the following invariants:
1. All buffer mutations during the squashing window
must be identical across all ranks sharing the GPU. The
9
difference between the buffer checksum state between
two points indicates mutations performed during that
interval. These mutations in the squashing window
must be identical in all respects (same addresses, same
checksums, same size).
2. Device-to-host copies performed during the squashing
window must copy exactly the same data across all
ranks sharing the GPU.
For simplicity, in PyTorch, we use the optimizer step as our
squashing window; however, the above validation mecha-
nism can be used to dynamically infer the squashing window
(i.e., sequence of operations where the invariants hold).
If the above validation fails, we treat the model as unsafe
for squashing and fall back to the swap-based mechanism (if
necessary, “rolling-back” the job to the last checkpoint where
validation suceeded). Note that if the model has slack space
in the GPU RAM, multiple copies of P and O could fit, and the
model could still run efficiently, but in general, there will be
a performance hit. We thus convert a potential correctness
problem into a measurable performance problem. Of course,
from the perspective of the scheduler, a high-overhead time-
slicing would be counter-productive for cluster efficiency.
Therefore, we monitor the overhead due to time-slicing, and
if it exceeds a threshold (e.g., >5% of mini-batch time), we
disable time-slicing for that model. This would be a rare sce-
nario but still needs to be gracefully handled for robustness.
5.3
Handling model-parallel jobs
The discussion so far has focused on data-parallel jobs. Han-
dling model-parallel jobs such as tensor-parallel and pipeline-
parallel jobs brings up new challenges. For example, a tensor-
parallel job performs an allreduce for every matrix multiplica-
tion in forward and backward pass. If we context-switch for
such allreduce, replica splicing would not work because acti-
vation tensors would still be live. Similarly, pipeline-parallel
jobs perform peer-to-peer send and receive of activations and
gradients across GPUs/nodes for every micro-batch; time-
slicing during the micro-batch would cause excessive swaps
because of live gradients and activations.
To address these challenges, Singularity uses two key tech-
niques: splicing-aware placement and inferring the intent of
collective calls. With splicing-aware placement, we ensure
that only data-parallel replicas of the same model-parallel
partition are time-sliced on the same GPU. For example,
to run a 8-rank job with 4-way pipelining and 2-way data-
parallelism on 4 physical GPUs, Singularity would place the
two data-parallel replicas of the same pipeline stage in each
GPU. The same applies to 3D parallel jobs; the ranks that are
time-sliced within the same device would belong to the same
pipeline stage and the same tensor-parallel partition. Note
that this requires Singularity to be aware of the rank assign-
ment logic. Two popular libraries NVIDIA-Megatron [27],
and DeepSpeed [26] have the same rank assignment logic
across the parallelism dimensions, and this logic is mirrored
in Singularity. For jobs that use a custom launcher with dif-
ferent rank assignment policy, Singularity provides an API
for the job to communicate the rank-to-topology mapping
for all ranks (e.g., Rank 4 is DP0, MP0, PP1 etc.).
Second, the device-proxy infers the intent of collective
communications and triggers time-slicing only on collec-
tive calls in the data-parallel dimension. Other collective
calls simply pass through without context-switching, which
is correct because completion of those calls only depends
on ranks executing on other GPUs and does not need in-
put from other data-parallel replicas time-sliced in the same
GPU. However, inferring the intent of a particular allreduce
call transparently is non-trivial, as each user model could
have its own control flow and ordering across communi-
cation in multiple dimensions of parallelism. Singularity
leverages the initialization path of collective communication
(e.g., ncclCommInitRank) to achieve this. It forces a context-
switch after every ncclCommInitRank, and the device-proxy
(that is shared across all ranks using the same device) keeps
a per-communicator count. After a full round of context
switches, if the local count for a communicator is >1, the
device-proxy infers that the communicator is in the data-
parallel dimension (because of splicing-aware placement
above). During a collective call, it simply looks up a map on
the communicator to know whether it is data-parallel.
5.4
Handling ZeRO-redundancy optimizer
ZeRO [25] shards the data-parallel state such that there is
no redundancy across data-parallel workers. Such partition-
ing violates our invariants for squashing validation (§ 5.2.3).
To handle this, Singularity introduces the notion of partial
sharding for ZERO, which decouples the sharding factor (min-
imum needed to fit the model in GPU) from data-parallelism
degree (for parallelism). If the two are equal, the model is by
definition not shrinkable to fewer GPUs as it cannot fit. If the
data-parallelism factor is higher, say, 4x the sharding factor),
then we can support up to 4-way time-slicing/scale-down.
In this scenario, the partial sharding factor simply becomes
another dimension of model-parallelism, and only replicas
of the same ZERO-shard are time-sliced. Introducing partial
sharding in DeepSpeed was quite straightforward (around
30 lines of Python code).
6
Implementation
Our mechanisms for transparent checkpointing, preemption,
resumption, and elasticity are an integral part of the Singu-
larity scheduler. In this section, we briefly highlight a few
implementation challenges.
Serializing opaque parameters. In our interception-based
device-proxy, the 𝐷𝐼𝑛𝑡for cudaLaunchKernel is challeng-
ing because its signature is opaque, making serialization
difficult (the signature is generated internally by NVIDIA’s
10
nvcc and is invisible to interceptor). To handle this, we have
a custom server 𝑆𝐴𝐼𝑛𝑡for cudaLaunchKernel which uses
cuObjDump, a binary utility in the CUDA toolkit that parses
the generated kernel library and extracts parameter infor-
mation. To avoid the high cost, we cache this information
and run cuObjDump only on cache misses. For JIT kernels,
we intercept nvrtcCompileProgram and extract the param
signatures by parsing the PTX that is generated.
Hiding dispatch latency. The cross-address space invoca-
tion in device-proxy happens in the critical path of oper-
ations such as cudaLaunchKernel and cudaGetLastError,
which affects performance. We use domain-specific optimiza-
tions for the most frequent calls. For cudaGetLastError, we
opportunistically issue it at the server during every kernel
launch and piggyback it along with its response, so that the
device-proxy client can return it from the cache when Py-
Torch issues it. For cudaLaunchKernel, we perform delayed
error notification, the call returns at the client without wait-
ing for response from device-proxy server; the response is
read lazily before issuing the next call to the server, thus al-
lowing overlap between PyTorch processing at client and the
latency incurred by the server; because PyTorch (and other
frameworks) crash when such (rare) errors are encountered,
this does not affect the job semantics.
Hiding context-switching overhead. Switching from one
rank to another during time-slicing involves computing
checksums of all live device tensors and comparing them
with the other rank’s copy, performing buffer moves if neces-
sary (a few ms of CPU activity). Further, the switching logic
depends on the output of the checksum computation which
in turn waits for all prior GPU operations to complete, implic-
itly forcing a device sync. To avoid incurring this cost in the
critical path, Singularity performs eager dispatch of the next
rank. The device-proxy starts servicing the next rank in par-
allel with the switching logic, thus overlapping useful work
by the next rank (CPU logic, dispatch of device operations)
with the switching latency. By careful use of asynchronous
ordering primitives such as cudaStreamWaitEvent, we en-
sure that operations for the new rank execute on the GPU
only after the switching is complete.
7
Evaluation
We now evaluate the mechanisms for transparent preemp-
tion and elasticity in Singularity, across a wide variety of
popular models. We explore the following issues:
• Steady-state overhead of device-proxy
• Checkpoint size with transparent checkpointing
• Overhead of transparent time-slicing for elasticity
• End-to-end latency of migration and resizing
• Robustness of the transparent fungibility approach
The models we use in our evaluation are listed in Ta-
ble 2. All experiments are run on NVIDIA DGX-2 servers (8
V100 GPUs per node with NVLink connectivity); servers are
Model
Library
#Params
Domain
Parallelism
BERT-MRPC [5]
Huggingface
109M
NLP
DP
DenseNet169 [12]
PyTorch Ex.
14M
CV
DP
PyramidNet [3]
End-user
24M
CV
DP
GPT-2 [2]
Megatron
1.8 B
NLG
3D
ResNet50 [12]
PyTorch Ex.
26M
CV
DP
InternalQ
Internal
355M
NLU
DP
InternalT
Internal
8 B
NLG
3D
Table 2. Models used in evaluation. Legend: DP=data-
parallel 3D=Data+Tensor+Pipeline parallel. InternalQ and
InternalT are internal production models at Microsoft.
Time per minibatch (s)
Model
1-GPU
16-GPU
B
DP
%
B
DP
%
BERT
0.43
0.43
0
0.42
0.42
0
DenseNet169
0.26
0.26
0
0.29
0.3
2.9
PyramidNet
0.25
0.24
-3.3
0.27
0.26
-4.2
ResNet50
0.20
0.20
0
0.21
0.22
2.1
InternalQ
0.56
0.56
0
0.72
0.72
0
Model
1-GPU
32-GPU
B
DP
%
B
DP
%
GPT-2
NA
NA
NA
1.86
1.77
-5.0
InternalT
NA
NA
NA
7.12
6.96
-2.3
Table 3. Steady-state overhead of device-proxy. Mini-
batch times for two configurations of job size. B = baseline,
DP = Singularity (Device Proxy). % overhead is also shown
connected via InfiniBand. Each server is a Xeon Platinum
8168 with 2 sockets of 20 cores each and 692 GB of RAM.
Per-rank mini-batch size is kept constant independent of
data-parallelism degree.
7.1
Overhead of device-proxy
We first evaluate the cost of dynamic interception with our
device-proxy architecture, where GPU calls are dispatched
to a different address space. Table 3 shows the average time
taken per mini-batch for each of our models, with and with-
out device-proxy. As can be seen, the device-proxy has negli-
gible impact on end-to-end performance, with overheads be-
low 3% in most models, including GPT-2 and InternalT which
use a combination of data-parallelism, tensor-parallelism,
and pipeline-parallelism. Note that for some models, our
performance is actually better because of our optimizations
such as overlapping cudaLaunchKernel (§ 6).
7.2
Checkpoint Size
We now evaluate the checkpoint size (§ 4.6) under Singularity,
and compare it with user-level checkpointing, under two
configurations: 4 workers, and 8 workers. In general, the size
of our checkpoint for an N-worker job is:
11
User-
Singularity checkpoint (GB)
Model
chkpt
4-GPU
8-GPU
(GB)
𝑆𝐺
𝑆𝐶𝑟
𝑆𝑖
𝐶𝑟
𝑆𝐺
𝑆𝐶𝑟
𝑆𝑖
𝐶𝑟
BERT
1.3
1.26
2.09
0.027
1.27
4.19
0.052
DenseNet169
0.11
0.26
4.39
2.88
0.42
8.73
5.63
PyramidNet
0.19
0.19
1.05
0.029
0.19
2.09
0.057
GPT-2*
24.2
NA
NA
NA
33.05
4.8
5.2
ResNet50
0.2
0.35
4.0
2.57
0.51
8.01
4.94
InternalQ
4.0
5.4
1.53
0.035
5.4
3.05
0.11
InternalT*
274
NA
NA
NA
162
13.1
0.19
Table 4. Checkpoint Size. Compares checkpoint sizes of
Singularity with user-level checkpoints. 𝑆𝐺is GPU state, 𝑆𝐶𝑟
is the size of first CRIU dump (all workers), 𝑆𝑖
𝐶𝑟is size of
subsequent (incremental) dumps. * on GPT-2 and InternalT
indicates 32-worker configs (larger model size).
𝑆𝐺+ 𝑆𝐶𝑟, where 𝑆𝐶𝑟= 𝑁∗𝑆𝑝𝑤𝐶𝑟
𝑆𝐺is the size of GPU state (Parameters and Optimizer State)
for a single data-parallel replica, and 𝑆𝑝𝑤𝐶𝑟is the per-worker
CRIU dump size. While the CRIU dump size scales with the
number of workers, the GPU size is independent of the num-
ber of data-parallel replicas. Table 4 shows these results. We
can see that 𝑆𝐺, the GPU state saved by Singularity check-
point is quite comparable to user-level checkpoints, despite
semantics-oblivious buffer-level checkpointing. For CRIU
checkpoints of CPU state, we show two numbers: the size of
the first checkpoint, and that of subsequent checkpoints (rep-
resentative of continuous checkpointing scenario). Because
of the temporal deduplication that Singularity performs, the
subsequent checkpoints are an order of magnitude smaller
than the first checkpoint for many models. Even for the
first checkpoint, the per-worker CRIU dump size (𝑆𝑝𝑤𝐶𝑟) is
< 1GB in most cases, which is quite manageable even for
large jobs. As expected, the CRIU dump size for 8-workers is
twice as large as the 4-worker config. Note that the numbers
for GPT-2 and InternalT reflect 32-worker configurations.
While cross-worker deduplication of CRIU images could be
explored to reduce the size further, we find the present num-
bers are quite acceptable in practice.
7.3
Replica splicing for Elasticity
The core enabler for transparent elasticity is our ability to
time-slice multiple workers on the same GPU with replica
splicing. Figure 4 shows the overhead caused by replica splic-
ing for various models, under two configurations: 2-way
time-slicing (32 workers on 16 GPUs), and 4-way time-slicing
(8 workers on 2 GPUs). In each, we compare our time-sliced
run with a baseline run of unmodified PyTorch (without Sin-
gularity) in fully scaled-up mode. With N-way time-slicing,
the mini-batch time is expected to increase by a factor of
N (i.e., same work but fewer GPUs); any increase beyond
this is overhead. As can be seen, the overhead introduced by
time-slicing in scaled-down mode (right Y-axis) is less than
3% for most models, demonstrating the efficacy of replica
 0
 2
 4
 6
 8
 10
 12
 14
ResNet50
DenseNet169
PyramidNet
BERT
Internal-Q
GPT-2
Internal-T
-20
-15
-10
-5
 0
 5
 10
 15
 20
Time per minibatch (s)
Percentage overhead with time-slicing
Transparent Elasticity: Performance
Baseline (8-on-8)
Elasticity (8-on-2)
Baseline (32-on-32)
Elasticity (32-on-16)
Percentage overhead
Figure 4. Overhead of time-slicing
Latency (s)
Model
16-to-16
16-to-8
8-to-16
Total
Transfer
Total
Transfer
Total
Transfer
BERT
36
17
45
26
34
15
DenseNet169
64
40
69
45
75
51
PyramidNet
28
7
31
12
30
9
ResNet50
58
37
67
45
59
39
InternalQ
46
24
68
44
49
24
GPT-2*
72
44
122
85
97
51
InternalT*
141
98
228
165
181
121
Table 5. Latencies of migration and resizing. This table
shows the end-to-end latency of migration (16-to-16), scale-
up (8-to-16) and scale-down (16-to-8). (𝑚-to-𝑛) indicates mi-
gration from 𝑚GPUs to 𝑛GPUs. *GPT-2 and InternalT used
32 workers (we report 32-to-32, 32-to-16, and 16-to-32)
splicing. Even for small models with low mini-batch times
of 200ms, the overhead is only about 5%.
GPT-2 and InternalT are large models that run with model-
parallelism (we used a configuration of 4-way data-parallel,
4-way pipeline-parallel, and 2-way tensor-parallel). For In-
ternalT, we also used ZERO Stage-1 with our modifications
for partial-sharding (2-way sharding of optimizer state). By
efficiently time-slicing on the data-parallel dimension, replica
splicing interestingly achieves a small net performance gain
over scaled-up execution (because of squashing redundant
GPU operations across ranks). To illustrate the benefit of
some of our optimizations, we also performed a run with op-
eration squashing disabled, where, as expected, the overhead
of time-slicing was much higher (64% for BERT, 103% for GPT-
2, 163% for Int-Q, 72% for Int-T, 18% for ResNet/DenseNet).
Overall, with all our optimizations, we see that Singularity
achieves transparent elasticity with negligible overhead, for
models across a wide range of sizes and parallelism strategies.
12
7.4
Latency of migration & resizing
Unlike library-based checkpointing where the job is restarted
(thus leading to repeated initialization work), migration and
resizing in Singularity is work-conserving as it resumes from
the same program state. The latency is thus purely a function
of the time taken to (a) acquire a barrier, (b) generate a GPU
and CRIU dump (c) upload the dump to remote storage, (d)
download the dump on a different set of nodes (e) restore
the CRIU dumps and GPU dumps, and release the barrier. Ta-
ble 5 shows these latencies. For most models, this end-to-end
latency for migration or resizing is in tens of seconds, with
more than half the time going in the upload and download
from remote Azure blob storage (shown as Transfer time).
We are working on a peer-to-peer transfer mechanism over
InfiniBand, bypassing the blob store, which would signifi-
cantly reduce the transfer time in the common case. Note
that these jobs run for hours or even days (e.g., InternalT),
so even with several migrations, there is negligible impact
on the job runtime.
7.5
Robustness/Maintainability of device-proxy
Because of the narrow surface area of our interception and
the generality of our domain-specific observations, the device-
proxy is robust and maintainable. In addition to the wide
diversity of models explored above, we have tested both the
migration and elasticity mechanisms across three versions
of PyTorch: 1.6, 1.7, and 1.8, and multiple versions of CUDA:
10.1, 11.0, and 11.1; the effort to get a new version working
was negligible, demonstrating the generality and practicality
of the approach.
8
Related Work
Prior work related to Singularity can be broadly grouped
across three categories: DNN schedulers, elasticity mecha-
nisms, and migration mechanisms.
DNN Schedulers. Cluster schedulers that are tailored for
deep learning have been an actively researched topic in re-
cent times. Systems such as Gandiva [14, 28], Tiresias [17],
Themis [19], Pollux [24] are examples. Most of these systems
focus on scheduling policies aimed at optimizing different
target metris such as job makespan, JCT, throughput, “good-
put”, etc.. While some systems [14, 18, 28] propose migration
and elastic resource sharing as an enabler for better schedul-
ing, they don’t address the problem of how to deal with the
vast majority of jobs that are not migratable or elastic. What
differentiates Singularity compared to such systems, are the
novel and generic mechanisms in Singularity to make all
jobs preemptible, resumable and elastic. These enable Sin-
gularity to use a new scheduling SLA of GPU fraction that
treats preemption and elasticity as first-class constructs.
Job Elasticity. Singularity is the first system that enables
efficient, truly transparent elasticity of existing, unmodified
DNN training jobs. Systems that provide elasticity today for
DNN training jobs all require the user to use custom libraries
that take over the training loop. As a result, elasticity is a
niche feature today. Singularity represents a paradigm shift
by making all jobs elastic, without any dependency on the
job using specific custom libraries.
A recent system [21] proposes automatic scaling of re-
sources, but it is not transparent, as the effective global batch
size of the job varies with the scale, burdening the user with
additional complexity. Systems such as Pytorch-Elastic [11]
and MXNet Dynamic [4] enable training over variable num-
ber of GPUs but they require the user scripts to written in a
way that handles resource variability, and to specify differ-
ent sets of hyper-parameters for each configuration. A few
systems such as Optimus [22], Gavel [20] and Antman [29]
automatically determine the best configuration for a job
based on maximizing throughput but these systems ignore
statistical efficiency (large number of resources require large
batch sizes which can slow down convergence). Pollux [24]
is a recent system that models statistical efficiency as well as
throughput to determine the best configuration. However, in
all these systems, the user still needs to identify the optimal
learning rate for their job as a function of batch size. Instead,
with Singularity, elasticity is completely transparent to the
user: the job always runs with the same number of workers
with the same parameters; Singularity simply remaps these
workers to a different number of physical devices.
Job Migration. Live process migration has received inter-
est from the systems community for decades [15, 16, 23].
However, the generality of the workloads that such systems
targeted means they were inherently complex, having to
deal with the numerous corner-cases that each workload
brings, which has made their broad adoption in production
settings challenging. In contrast, migration in Singularity is
domain-specific, in that the checkpointing is timed such that
the process is in a relatively clean state - e.g., no GPU calls
in-flight, no in-flight network communication, aligned to the
end of a mini-batch etc., which makes the migration robust,
tractable, and efficient, with negligible steady-state overhead.
By carefully targetting the narrow surface area of CPU-to-
GPU communication, Singularity employs semantics-aware
optimizations (such as delayed error notification).
In the DNN context, several schedulers employ check-
pointing as a primitive, but assume that the application in-
corporates checkpoint functionality, an unrealistic assump-
tion (§ 2.1). For a service like Singularity that uses trans-
parent preemption and elasticity while honoring SLAs, all
jobs must be made checkpointable, regardless of whether
the user added any code for checkpointing logic explicitly.
Thus, low-overhead, transparent, on-demand checkpointing
is critical. Gandiva [28] was an early system that proposed
transparent checkpointing but this was achieved by making
extensive changes to the deep learning framework. Given the
rapid evolution of these frameworks, such intrusive changes
are hard to maintain and keep up to date. In contrast, the
13
proxy-based checkpointing mechanism in Singularity is de-
coupled from the framework, supporting both transparency
and maintainability.
9
Conclusion
Singularity achieves a significant breakthrough in schedul-
ing deep learning workloads, converting niche features such
as elasticity into mainstream, always-on features that the
scheduler can rely on for implementing stringent SLAs. With
novel mechanisms that make unmodified jobs preemptible
and resizable with negligible performance overhead, Singu-
larity enables unprecedented levels of workload fungibility,
making it possible for jobs to take advantage of spare ca-
pacity anywhere in the globally-distributed fleet, while still
preserving the SLAs. Singularity achieves all of this with a
remarkably simple user experience: the user focuses only
on the ML task and does not need to think about check-
pointing or elasticity; these mechanisms are infrastructure
optimizations that are completely transparent to the user.
Acknowledgments
We are grateful to Kevin Scott, Mikhail Parakhin, Peter Lee,
and Sriram Rajamani for sharing the vision of Singularity
and their support. We would like to thank the customers of
Singularity for their valuable feedback.
References
[1] CRIU: Checkpoint Restore in Userspace. https://criu.org/Main_Page.
[2] DeepSpeedExamples/Megatron-LM-3D_parallelism.
https://
github.com/microsoft/DeepSpeedExamples/tree/master/Megatron-
LM-v1.1.5-3D_parallelism.
[3] dnddnjs/pytorch-cifar10: pytorch-cifar10/pyramidnet.
https://
github.com/dnddnjs/pytorch-cifar10/tree/master/pyramidnet.
[4] Dynamic Training with Apache MXNet. https://github.com/awslabs/
dynamic-training-with-apache-mxnet-on-aws.
[5] Huggingface/transformers - transformers/examples/pytorch/text-
classification’.
https://github.com/huggingface/transformers/tree/
master/examples%2Fpytorch%2Ftext-classification.
[6] Nvidia apex library. https://github.com/NVIDIA/apex.
[7] Nvidia multi-process service: Gpu management and deployment. In
https://docs.nvidia.com/deploy/mps/index.html.
[8] Nvidia thrust. In https://developer.nvidia.com/thrust.
[9] Openai triton. In https://openai.com/blog/triton/.
[10] Papers with code. In https://paperswithcode.com/.
[11] PyTorch Elastic. https://github.com/pytorch/elastic.
[12] Pytorch Examples: examples/imagenet. https://github.com/pytorch/
examples/tree/master/imagenet.
[13] Jason Ansel, Kapil Arya, and Gene Cooperman. Dmtcp: Transparent
checkpointing for cluster computations and the desktop. In 2009 IEEE
International Symposium on Parallel & Distributed Processing, pages
1–12. IEEE, 2009.
[14] Shubham Chaudhary, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian Sivathanu,
Nipun Kwatra, and Srinidhi Viswanatha. Balancing efficiency and
fairness in heterogeneous gpu clusters for deep learning. In Proceedings
of the Fifteenth European Conference on Computer Systems, pages 1–16,
2020.
[15] Fred Douglis and John Ousterhout. Transparent process migration:
Design alternatives and the sprite implementation. Software: Practice
and Experience, 21(8):757–785, 1991.
[16] Rohan Garg, Gregory Price, and Gene Cooperman. Mana for mpi: Mpi-
agnostic network-agnostic transparent checkpointing. In Proceedings
of the 28th International Symposium on High-Performance Parallel and
Distributed Computing, pages 49–60, 2019.
[17] Juncheng Gu, Mosharaf Chowdhury, Kang G Shin, Yibo Zhu, Myeong-
jae Jeon, Junjie Qian, Hongqiang Liu, and Chuanxiong Guo. Tire-
sias: A {GPU} cluster manager for distributed deep learning. In 16th
{USENIX} Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementa-
tion ({NSDI} 19), pages 485–500, 2019.
[18] Changho Hwang, Taehyun Kim, Sunghyun Kim, Jinwoo Shin, and
KyoungSoo Park. Elastic resource sharing for distributed deep learn-
ing. In 18th USENIX Symposium on Networked Systems Design and
Implementation (NSDI 21), pages 721–739, 2021.
[19] Kshiteej Mahajan, Arjun Balasubramanian, Arjun Singhvi, Shivaram
Venkataraman, Aditya Akella, Amar Phanishayee, and Shuchi Chawla.
Themis: Fair and efficient {GPU} cluster scheduling. In 17th {USENIX}
Symposium on Networked Systems Design and Implementation ({NSDI}
20), pages 289–304, 2020.
[20] Deepak Narayanan, Keshav Santhanam, Fiodar Kazhamiaka, Amar
Phanishayee, and Matei Zaharia. Heterogeneity-aware cluster schedul-
ing policies for deep learning workloads. In 14th {USENIX} Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 20), pages
481–498, 2020.
[21] Andrew Or, Haoyu Zhang, and Michael Freedman. Resource elasticity
in distributed deep learning. Proceedings of Machine Learning and
Systems, 2:400–411, 2020.
[22] Yanghua Peng, Yixin Bao, Yangrui Chen, Chuan Wu, and Chuanxiong
Guo. Optimus: an efficient dynamic resource scheduler for deep learn-
ing clusters. In Proceedings of the Thirteenth EuroSys Conference, pages
1–14, 2018.
[23] Michael L Powell and Barton P Miller. Process migration in demos/mp.
ACM SIGOPS Operating Systems Review, 17(5):110–119, 1983.
[24] Aurick Qiao, Sang Keun Choe, Suhas Jayaram Subramanya, Willie
Neiswanger, Qirong Ho, Hao Zhang, Gregory R Ganger, and Eric P
Xing. Pollux: Co-adaptive cluster scheduling for goodput-optimized
deep learning. In 15th {USENIX} Symposium on Operating Systems
Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 21), 2021.
[25] Samyam Rajbhandari, Jeff Rasley, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
Zero: Memory optimization towards training A trillion parameter
models. CoRR, abs/1910.02054, 2019.
[26] Jeff Rasley, Samyam Rajbhandari, Olatunji Ruwase, and Yuxiong He.
Deepspeed: System optimizations enable training deep learning mod-
els with over 100 billion parameters. In Proceedings of the 26th ACM
SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Min-
ing, pages 3505–3506, 2020.
[27] Mohammad Shoeybi, Mostofa Patwary, Raul Puri, Patrick LeGresley,
Jared Casper, and Bryan Catanzaro. Megatron-lm: Training multi-
billion parameter language models using gpu model parallelism. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1909.08053, 2019.
[28] Wencong Xiao, Romil Bhardwaj, Ramachandran Ramjee, Muthian Si-
vathanu, Nipun Kwatra, Zhenhua Han, Pratyush Patel, Xuan Peng,
Hanyu Zhao, Quanlu Zhang, et al. Gandiva: Introspective cluster
scheduling for deep learning. In 13th {USENIX} Symposium on Oper-
ating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 18), pages 595–610,
2018.
[29] Wencong Xiao, Shiru Ren, Yong Li, Yang Zhang, Pengyang Hou, Zhi
Li, Yihui Feng, Wei Lin, and Yangqing Jia. Antman: Dynamic scaling
on {GPU} clusters for deep learning. In 14th {USENIX} Symposium
on Operating Systems Design and Implementation ({OSDI} 20), pages
533–548, 2020.
14
